I invite you to turn please to Proverbs chapter 17.
And as you locate this in your Bible, I invite you also to imagine two runners.
One is rich, the other is poor.
The rich runner has a gymnasium, an Olympic-sized pool, all-the-weight machines, a nutritionist,
a physical therapist, a doctor, and a personal trainer.
And he has access to the finest foods there are.
But somewhere along the way, he's grown just a little bored with the whole concept of
foot races.
And so he hasn't put his heart into training.
Also lined up next to him is the poor runner.
The poor runner also has a few advantages.
He has a good pair of shoes.
He has real food, he eats not much, mostly plants, but he loves the race.
He has a heart for it.
He trains in all kinds of weather.
Now which of the two will win the race?
The man with the most advantages or the man with the heart?
Now with that illustration in mind, notice what it says in Proverbs 17 and verse 16.
What good is it that the stupid one has the means to acquire wisdom when he has no heart
for acquiring it?
Like winning a race, acquiring wisdom does not happen without effort, without cost, without
sacrifice, hence a person has to have the means.
And yet doesn't Jehovah really supply the necessary ingredients for each of us to acquire
wisdom?
It has access to thinking, ability, information, opportunities, evidence in some degree or
another if he really wants it.
But as Proverbs 17 and 16 asks, what good is that if a person has no heart, no drive,
no sense?
It's not about the multiplicity of our advantages or the quality of our advantages.
It's about the heart, the total inner person.
Now when it comes to acquiring true wisdom, making sound decisions despite not having much
data at one's disposal, our publications have often pointed to the example of Joseph.
Long before Moses recorded Jehovah's Law against adultery, Joseph understood that this
was a sin against God.
Recall his words at Genesis 39 and verse 9, there is no one greater in this house than
I am, and he has not withheld from me anything at all except you because you are his wife.
So how could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God, conscience fully
engaged?
But the question is, how did Joseph know that?
Follow along in Genesis and consider what may have influenced his thinking.
Joseph had one Bible principle and no less than four real life applications of that principle
to meditate on.
The principle, of course, is stated in Genesis 2, verse 24, that is why a man will leave
his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife and they will become one flesh,
the words of Jehovah God himself, earth's first wedding talk.
One man, one wife, one flesh, that's the standard, Joseph meditated on that.
And likely he meditated on what happened to his great grandfather Abram in chapter 12
as Abram and Sarai traveled to Egypt, Genesis 1217.
This account tells us that Abram failed to tell Pharaoh that he was married to Sarai.
So when Pharaoh showed special interest in Sarai, Genesis 1217 says that Jehovah struck
Pharaoh and all his household with severe plagues because of Sarai, Abram's wife.
Later in chapter 20, Abram and Sarai went to the land of Girar and employed a similar
strategy.
They didn't reveal that they were married and the king of Girar, Abimalech, had this experience
in Genesis 20 and verse 3, afterward God came by night to Abimalech in a dream and said
to him, here you are as good as dead because of the woman whom you have taken since she is
married and belongs to another man.
And Abimalech said to Jehovah, listen, I didn't know.
And Jehovah said, I know you didn't know.
And so he says in verse 6, at the end, I held you back from sinning against me, sinning
against me.
Joseph undoubtedly meditated on that.
Then in Genesis chapter 26 and verse 10, his grandfather Isaac and his grandmother Rebecca
also went to Girar.
They also met a man named Abimalech, likely a successor of the Abimalech mentioned in
chapter 20 and they too didn't tell Abimalech that they were married but the king found
out.
And so in Genesis chapter 26 and verse 10, Abimalech continued, what have you done with
us?
One of the people could have easily have lain down with your wife and you would have
brought guilt upon us.
And audibly Joseph meditated on that or considered what happened in Genesis chapter 34.
The principal recorded it, Genesis 2.24 again came into play, a man, his wife, one flesh.
Jacob was not yet married to Dina, but he violated her.
And Genesis chapter 34 verse 7 says, something like that ought not to be done.
That was how it was viewed.
So while it's true that Joseph didn't have the mosaic law, young people ask, learned
from the great teacher, JW Library or JW.org, he had a principal.
He had enough.
He had seen at no fewer than four applications of that principal.
If only Ruben and Judah had also had such appreciation for that principal.
But the point is, Joseph fed his heart with that knowledge and there's also another
important factor that we can't lose sight of in Genesis chapter 39 and verse 21.
It wasn't just an intellectual exercise for Joseph.
Look at chapter 39 and what it says in verse 21, Jehovah continued with Joseph and kept
showing loyal love to him.
Yes, even before the situation where he was tested with Potiphar's wife, Jehovah had
been showing loyal love to him.
That's born out in Genesis chapter 39 verse 3.
And afterward he kept showing loyal love.
And to whom does Jehovah show loyal love?
Jehovah shows loyal love to those acting in loyalty toward him.
Doesn't that be speak a relationship?
Joseph wasn't just interested.
He didn't just love Jehovah's righteous standards.
He loved Jehovah as a person and that was the key.
Turn with me please to Psalm 119, verse 9.
Joseph had what Proverbs calls the means to acquire wisdom.
He didn't have the libraries, the websites and the broadcasts, but he had enough.
Now notice the similarities between Joseph's situation and that described here in Psalm 119.
How can a young man keep his path clean by keeping on guard according to your word with
my whole heart?
I seek you.
Do not let me stray from your commandments.
In my heart, I treasure up your saying so that I may not sin against you.
A Joseph had what these verses are talking about.
He searched for Jehovah with his whole heart.
He treasured up Jehovah's sayings in his heart and that's how he was able to stay true
to Jehovah the person that he loved.
Well we can do the same.
We have so much more data than Joseph had.
We have such excellent tools and Jehovah hasn't changed.
So the essential question always boils down to this.
How is my heart?
Am I still seeking Jehovah with my whole heart or are fear, greed, immoral desire or
the negative emotions depriving from the completeness of my heart?
If our heart is complete, then we can indeed avoid being swept away by the flood of immoral
propaganda spewed out by Satan's system of things.